# Changelog

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.

The format is based on [Keep a Changelog](https://keepachangelog.com/en/1.0.0/),
and this project adheres to [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html).

## [Unreleased]

## [0.21.0] - 2020-06-22

### Added

- `.json`, `.geojson` and `.topojson` files in the `assets` directory will now have hashes generated and work like you'd expect with `{% static %}`. In production these files will also be minified.

### Changed

- Baker no longer uses `hasha` to calculate file hashes and instead rolls its own with `crypto`, dropping two dependencies.

## [0.20.0] - 2020-06-17

### Added

A new experimental Rollup plugin has been added to `baker` to provide an additional way to pull primitive values from files in the `_data` folder into JavaScript files. By importing a value from a special `data:*` path you can use the value directly.

So if there was `meta.json` file in your `_data` folder:

```json
{
  "breed": "corgi",
  "names": ["Abe", "Winston", "Willow"]
}
```

Then you could tap into it like this:

```js
import breed from 'data:meta.breed';

console.log(breed); // "corgi"
```

However - to prevent any excessively large imports this plugin will prevent the import of anything that's not a primitive value (number, boolean, string, etc.). This means _no_ arrays or objects.

```js
import names from 'data:meta.names'; // will throw a Rollup error!
```

### Changed

- `postcss` will now be ran against any CSS in development as well. This prevents the (increasingly) rare case of where a CSS property only has support with a prefix. (`appearance: none` was the driver for this.) This could cryptically break in development and _then_ work in production, which is about as non-ideal as you can get.
- `fs-extra` has been purged from the library in favor of native `fs.promises` and `rimraf`.
- The CLI command now throws proper `process.exit()` calls.
- The dev server (via `mini-sync`) now waits for the initial build to succeed before attempting to serve. This should help prevent partial serves and throw more helpful errors if there is something critically wrong without leaving the dev server in limbo.
- We now use `colorette` for all our terminal coloring needs.

### Fixed

- Failures to process a file in the `_data` directory will now throw legitmate errors via `quaff`. In the case of JSON this means you'll get actually useful line numbers.

## [0.20.0-alpha.0] - 2020-02-09

### Added

- It's now possible to pass a `staticRoot` path to Baker, which will make every non-HTML engine output into the `staticRoot` **relative** to `output`. This is intented to make multi-page deploys more viable in certain scenarios.

## [0.19.0] - 2020-02-06

### Added

- Each HTML page generated by Nunjucks now has access to the local context variable `current_page`. As of this release the only value in this object is `current_page.absolute_url`, which is intended to replace the global `CURRENT_URL`.

### Removed

- The `CURRENT_URL` Nunjucks global is no longer available, and has been replaced by the local context object `current_page`. Please note this now means any usage of `current_page` **must** be passed into macros, who do not have access to the local context.

### Fixed

- The `CURRENT_URL` Nunjucks global was subject to a race condition when Baker is in multiple-page output mode due to the async render method. This means it was possible for an HTML page to use the wrong `CURRENT_URL`. Now, the current URL of a page will appear on a local context variable called `current_page.absolute_url`, guaranteeing that each page can only ever see it's own `current_page` context.

## [0.18.2] - 2020-02-05

### Fixed

- The included `preload` via `{% script %}` now passes `crossorigin`.

## [0.18.1] - 2020-02-05

### Fixed

- The preload section of the `{% script %}` block now accounts for the `pathPrefix` and resolves relative to it.

## [0.18.0] - 2020-02-05

### Added

- It's now possible to pass a second flag to the `{% script %}` block that instructs it to include any scripts that are candidates for preloading. This is recommended in browsers that support `rel=preload` in order to assist the browser in efficiently loading assets. You should **only** use this if something like [Lighthouse](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/lighthouse/) is suggesting it. To activate it, just pass `true` as the second parameter to `{% script %}` and Baker will do the rest.

```html
{% script 'app', true %}
```

## [0.17.0] - 2020-02-04

### Added

- `dotenv-expand` has been added to our `.env` file logic, allowing for tapping into existing environment variables to build values `baker` can see. the `BAKER_` prefix is still enforced, however - but this provides a way to morph existing variables into compatible ones.

### Fixed

- The reworked `inject` function from `0.15.0` did not account for local development when a manifest does not exist for `AssetsEngine` output. This has been fixed. It instead will look for the local version of the file in `development` and continue to error out in `production` if the manifest check fails.

## [0.16.1] - 2020-01-19

### Fixed

- `@babel/preset-typescript` also needs to know what the JSX pragma is so it knows to ignore it. This patch ensures both `@babel/preset-typescript` and `@babel/plugin-transform-react-jsx` get passed the same one.

## [0.16.0] - 2020-01-19

### Added

- Added support for TypeScript (`.ts`, `.tsx`) files in the `scripts` directory via `@babel/preset-typescript`. They are also allowed as `entrypoints` if passed. Actual type-checking is left up to the user, all this does is remove any TypeScript artifacts from the files - BYO `tsconfig.json` and `tsc` calls.

## [0.15.0] - 2020-01-17

### Added

- Added a reworked `inject` block, which allows for inserting the contents of a file **post** processing directly into the HTML. This is useful for potentially "injecting" CSS or JavaScript into the page.

## [0.14.0] - 2020-01-16

### Added

- Video files (`.mp4`, `.webm`) are now recognized by `AssetsEngine` and will be included in any hashing.

## [0.13.2] - 2020-01-10

### Fixed

- Some `dependencies` got moved to `devDependencies`, meaning you wouldn't have got them on install. Oops.

## [0.13.1] - 2020-01-10

### Fixed

- `Baker.pathPrefix` is now set to `/` in `development` mode so a passed `pathPrefix` does not break anything in serve mode.

## [0.13.0] - 2020-01-10

### Added

- The Nunjucks environment now includes a new global named `CURRENT_URL`. This represents the final URL of each generated page that can be used in its template. It's based on a combination of the provided `domain`, `pathPrefix` and clean (without `index.html` appended) path of the output HTML itself.

## [0.12.0] - 2020-01-09

### Added

- Added new built-in `date` filter to Nunjucks, which allows for formatting of an ISO date string or Date object with `date-fns` [formatting function](https://date-fns.org/v2.8.1/docs/format).
- Added a new parameter that must be passed to `new Baker()` — `domain`. This is used by `staticabsolute` to prepare absolute project URLs. (May become optional later for scenarios where this doesn't matter.)
- Added new `staticabsolute` block, which makes it possible to build absolute URLs to project files.

## [0.11.0] - 2019-12-06

### Added

- Font files (`.woff2`, `.woff`, `.ttf`, `.otf`) are now recognized by `AssetsEngine` and will be included in any hashing.

### Fixed

- Baker now picks up images with without all lowercase extensions and includes them the compression and hashing process.

## [0.10.0] - 2019-12-03

### Added

- The function that resolves static files is now available on a Baker instance as `getStaticPath`. This enables users of Baker to tap into the file resolution logic however they see fit.

## [0.9.0] - 2019-11-18

### Added

- Modern JavaScript builds now use [`@babel/preset-modules`](https://github.com/babel/preset-modules). This should result in even smaller modern bundles that natively support features that already exist in ~85% of browsers.

### Removed

- Automatic web polyfill injection has been removed. It's just too much magic going on, and we shouldn't assume that every single thing will need `fetch` + `intersection-observer` + `classlist` injected into it. (JavaScript features are still polyfilled via `core-js`. In other words if it's something you'd be able to do in Node.js it's handled.) The gains of keeping a few polyfills out of the modern build aren't worth the confusion. However this does mean users are now responsible for importing their own polyfills.

## [0.8.0] - 2019-11-03

### Added

- The Rollup engine now supports both Svelte (`.svelte` files) and Preact (the usage of JSX) as options for JavaScript-based HTML templating.

### Changed

- `browser-sync` has been replaced with [`mini-sync`](https://github.com/rdmurphy/mini-sync). `browser-sync` was one of the largest packages installed in `baker`, and this should lead to quicker install times.

### Removed

- The old legacy Rollup engine has been deleted and the one previously called `rollup2.js` has taken its place.

## [0.7.0] - 2019-10-18

### Added

- Support for correctly formatted environment variables that are passed to `rollup-plugin-replace` has been added. Any environment variable that begins with `BAKER_` will be read and converted to the `process.env.BAKER_*` format that can be used in JavaScript files. Any environmental variables that do not have a match are ignored.

It's also possible to manage these with a `.env` in the root of your project. The same rule regarding the `BAKER_` prefix applies.

## [0.6.0] - 2019-09-17

### Added

- Two custom functions have been added to the `sass` renderer — `static-url` and `static-path`. These are implemented against the Node.js API (and not within a Sass file) because they need to reference the static asset manifests. They are used in the same scenarios as the `{% static %}` block in Nunjucks templates — you need to reference the path to a static asset in your project, but need it to be given the correct hash prefix on production builds.

`static-url` is meant to be a shortcut for anything you'd normally put inside of `url()`, which it will include for you.

_SCSS_

```scss
body {
  background-image: static-url('assets/background.png');
}
```

_CSS_

```css
body {
  background-image: url(/assets/background.123abc.png);
}
```

`static-path` only adjusts the path and returns it as a string. This will probably be less used, but it's there as an escape hatch if you need it.

```scss
body {
  background-image: url(static-path('assets/background.png'));
}
```

_CSS_

```css
body {
  background-image: url(/assets/background.123abc.png);
}
```

### Changed

- Now only valid images will receive the file hash in production mode. This is imperfect, but better than every random asset getting a hash unnecessarily and causing issues when they're used. (Looking at you, `.gltf` files.) Ideally this would be smarter, but not quite sure how to go about that yet.

## [0.5.0] - 2019-09-04

### Added

- Nunjucks templates now have a better error logger. It's not perfect, but should help find specific lines causing issues.
- Template files in the layout directory are now watched during a serve - if any changes are made templates are regenerated.
- Files in the `data` directory are now watched during a serve and will trigger a template build.

### Changed

- This package is now deployed on `npm` at `@datagraphics/baker` instead of `@datadesk/baker`, which has been deprecated.

## [0.4.0] - 2019-09-03

### Added

- Legacy script builds now use `core-js` to polyfill and add features that may be missing in those browsers. This will likely cause the `iife` build to be bigger than it should be, but this prevents users from having to whack-a-mole issues with IE 11. It should just work.
- Polyfills for both the modern and legacy are automatically inserted into every entrypoint, with the assumption there's a base set of features we should expect to be there. For modern builds, it's support for dynamic imports and IntersectionObserver. For legacy builds, it's fetch, Element.classList and IntersectionObserver.

### Changed

- The engine for Rollup has been rewritten to be much smarter about how it navigates modern and legacy builds. This also does away with SystemJS in favor of native modules for browsers that support it, and an `iife` build for browsers that do not.

## [0.3.0] - 2019-08-16

### Added

- Added `AssetsEngine` for management of generic assets files in a build. By default it looks for an `assets` directory in the input directory.

### Changed

- The `ImagesEngine` is no more and has been merged into `AssetsEngine`. This means that images _must_ be in the `assets` directory to be found and handled.

## [0.2.1] - 2019-08-16

### Fixed

- A `pathPrefix` should always have a leading slash to ensure pathing resolution works.

## [0.2.0] - 2019-08-08

### Changed

- The serve task now runs all the engines in an initial pass before activating the server. This ensures that the local development URL is not presented as available before it truly is.

## [0.1.0] - 2019-08-07

### Added

- Initial release.
